[TITLE]

[THE LOGICS] Species interactions integrated in SDMs: everybody knows it's
important, but nobody knows exactly how to do it. There's a big ecological and
evolutionary leap between local dynamics between species and the biogeographical
processes that are primary assumptions to the species distribution models.
Despite that, it's known that ecological interactions shape the limits of a
species' occurrence range (especially for plants), and SDMs are more efficient
when we add (what we believe accounts for) this effect. There are things that
have been done, some of them are quite satisfatory on specific cases, but can we
go further? SDMs of species with obligate mutualists, for example, are more
efficient when we add the mutualist occurrence raster as a layer on our model.
However, empirical data on ecological interactions are scarce, and we can't just
assume that two species will always interact when they co-occur. The good news
is that we have been developing techniques to predict and forecast ecological
interactions and networks with good accuracy, also accounting for evolutionary
processes, which can mitigate the eltonian shortfall we have now.  In this
context, we can envision an integrative approach of species distribution
modelling combined with network prediction resulting in a more realistic model,
where the predicted networks update the probabilities of occurrence computed by
an SDM.

[OUTLINE]

## Introduction

BAM fig - the logics behind SDMs
concept fig - where's this paper going
Why should we integrate interactions with SDMs - the right way?
Why is this paper important?

## SDMs: the mechanics, innovations and drawbacks

What people have been doing? Are these things cool? How a SDM works and why do
people think they can do what they do? What are the inovations brought by these
techniques? What are the limitations for current techniques?

## Going further

What do we need to go further? Should we make SDMs more realistic or more
generalistic? What would be the difference between being able to detect
interactions and to predict interactions for the quality of a SDM? If you need
interspecific interactions to predict species distribution, and if you need
species distribution to predict networks, how would your method work, exactly?
[Francis' question]

### Eltonian Noise

What does it means and how do we know it is important (or not)?

### Non-stationarity of interactions and networks in space, time and across
resolutions

The (big) problem of interactions not being stable (and why phylogenies
sometimes are not the answer)

### Why go further? Because we can!

What do we have now that allows us to go further?

### How

#### Filling in eltonian gaps with mathematics - predicting interactions,
networks, and doing it across scales

#### Updating probabilities of occurrences with network probabilities
Interactions predictions should be used to update our probabilities of
occurrence computed with SDM [Francis' input]

## Take-home messages

What don't we have yet? What are the roads never taken? Where should we invest
in order to achieve the best SDMs we can? What are the most promising areas for
development?
